I want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan and welcome to movie
endings explain where we'll be taking a
look at some of the more ambiguous and
discussed movie endings that have left
audiences debating their true meaning
long after the credits have rolled now
where was I
Christopher Nolan's memento was released
in 2000 long before the days of his
tentpole blockbusters and
larger-than-life cinematic offerings a
seemingly simple tale of a man living
with anterograde amnesia seeking to
avenge the murder of his wife Leonard
played by Guy Pearce was attacked at
home one night where his wife was raped
and murdered he killed one of the
attackers but the second threw him into
a mirror giving him the amnesia he still
retains all of the memories of his life
prior to the incident but with
anterograde amnesia he is unable to
create new memories every 15 minutes or
so sometimes less in stressful
circumstances
Leonard starts all over again in an
effort to find the second attacker and
to avenge his wife's murder
Leonard has covered his body in tattoos
all of them clues to help him remember
everything he is picking up about the
second man who he knows is called John G
he also keeps polaroid photos to give
him hints on his progress and the people
he is met along the way
interesting premise right well that's
just the basic story how that story is
told is what makes memento really
interesting and unique based on the
short story written by his brother
Jonathan Christopher Nolan presents
memento in two different timelines both
distinct in their visual style one in
color the other in black-and-white
the color timeline is intercut
throughout the entire film in reverse
chronological order the black and white
timeline is presented in normal
chronological order taking place before
the color sequences and the story begins
to unravel in a very unconventional
manner the film begins with the only
literal River
sequence in the movie with Leonard
watching a Polaroid of a man he just
shot dead undeveloped the man is Teddy a
cop who have sympathized with Leonard
and tried to help him find his wife's
killer the black and white scenes depict
Leonard in a motel narrating in a very
film noir inspired style more on that
later a key figure in the film story is
Sammy Jenkins now Leonard used to be an
insurance investigator and threw out the
black-and-white timeline he recalls the
story of Sammy Jenkins a man with
anterograde amnesia just like Leonard it
was Leonard's job to assess whether this
condition was a physical or mental
defect
Sammy Jenkins was put through many tests
but ultimately his diabetic wife who
required assistance with her insulin
shots decided to test her husband
herself she kept asking Sammy to
administer her shots hoping he would
remember that he had already given her
one but he didn't and she died partly
it's a cruel twist of fate that a tragic
story wrapped up in a condition that
Leonard didn't fully believe in is
exactly where Leonard finds himself
trapped now with his wife dead and
unable to create new memories but also
it might be another clue of which there
are many in the film as we reach the end
of the movie but more like the middle of
the story we're presented with the
apparent truth comes out Leonard is sent
to kill his wife's murderer by Teddy who
has tracked him down
Leonard strangles him takes a Polaroid
of the body and the black-and-white
slowly dissolves into color as the two
timelines coalesce yet Leonard is
disconcerted when the killer
whispers Sammy and wonders how he knew
about it and here teddy tells Leonard
the truth the man he killed Jimmy wasn't
his wife's killer Teddy helped Leonard
track down the real killer a year ago
and even has the pictures to prove it
since then he's been manipulating
Leonard into killing other potential
John Gees feeding him clues and keeping
his own hands clean
look how happy you are
I wanted to see that face again gee
thanks
[ __ ] you I gave you a reason to live and
you were more than happy to help you
don't want the truth
Sammy was a con man a faker
I never said that Sammy was faking
exposed him for what he was a fraud but
I was wrong that's the whole point
see Sammy's wife came to me Sammy didn't
have a wife it was your wife who had
diabetes
my wife wasn't diabetic you sure
she wasn't diabetic I think I don't know
my own wife at this point
Teddy's truth really can't be taken
literally
after all Leonard's memory before the
incident is still intact but maybe there
are partial truths which is all you're
really going to get from memento I think
no one himself has said that if you
watch the film closely the details are
all there but certain elements just
don't completely match up but that's
what memory is it's imperfect and in the
mind of a man who has gone through such
horrific trauma that grip on reality is
going to become so much more unhinged
and unreliable back to the film noir
comment one of the staples of the genre
of film noir is the unreliable narrator
a character who tells their story but
has very clearly recalled it in their
own bias Leonard could be seen as an
unreliable narrator as well as Teddy who
we eventually decode is quite the
crooked cop after learning this
revelation Leonard decides to leave
teddy he notes down Teddy's license
plate and notes it down for his next
tattoo effectively marking Teddy for
death as the next in a seemingly
unending line of John G's and this is
how the film concludes
I have to believe in the world outside
my own mind I have to believe that my
actions still have meaning even if I
can't remember them
have to believe that when my eyes are
closed the world still here do I believe
the words to air
[Music]
is it still out there
yeah
we all need marys to remind ourselves
who we are
[Music]
I'm no different
[Applause]
now where was I
now there are other elements to the
story that could play a key part into
the bigger picture namely the character
of Natalie and how she manipulates
Leonard also but the real key is
Leonard's past one of the more subtle
clues is when Leonard is recalling the
Sammy Jenkins story where after his
wife's death from the insulin injections
he ends up in an institution for a brief
moment
Leonard is in the same chair as Sammy
[Music]
now is it possible that Leonard was
actually committed and escaped I think
so but with the very nature of the
fragmented memories presented from
Leonard's point of view which we are
shown can be easily and quickly
manipulated by others I think memento is
one of the greats
unreliable in the rater films there's a
million ways you can break down this
movie and strip it down piece by piece
but nothing can reconcile the fact that
we cannot truly trust
Leonard's mind when he confronts Jimmy
at the end of the film just before the
black and white gives way to the color
he sees flashes of his wife she was
apparently murdered by asphyxiation and
as he chokes Jimmy to death we see
flashes of his wife's face wrapped in
plastic this is before Teddy tells
Leonard that Sammy's story is his story
so perhaps Leonard really did kill his
own wife now at the very end of the film
we see a flash of her lying on his chest
with a tattoo that reads I've done it a
tattoo we never see at any of the point
in the film if his wife truly is still
alive perhaps when he killed Teddy at
the end of the story and the beginning
of the movie he broke the chain of his
condition and returned to a prototypical
happy ending but far more likely than
that is the bitter more realistic route
that he is imagining a fantasy in which
he does escape his eternal murderous
purgatory one that he ultimately decides
to stay in by marking Teddy as the next
John G anyway ignorance is bliss he
wants to find that happy ending but he
knows that it's impossible so
he continues on regardless of the truth
stuck in an everlasting sense of rage
and vengeance bound to be driven to
avenge his wife's death forever
whichever version of the truth you
believe
[Music]
you